title: Website refurbished
slug: new-website
date: 03-03-2015
tags:pelican, nikola
summary: I crashed my [nikola](http://getnikola.com) static installation - which was far from stable anyway, and went for [pelican](http://blog.getpelican.com/).

## Welcome to the brand new DamCB website!

I'm still toying around with themes and general organisation, but I
must say it went very smoothly. I won't commit an installation
tutorial, because many have done that quite nicely already, and the
doc is nice, once you've perused it long and large. Noob as I am on
everything web, it took me only two days to get the site up with nice
notebooks rendering and an effective deploy work-flow.

[Jake Vanderplas](http://jakevdp.github.io/blog/2013/05/07/migrating-from-octopress-to-pelican/)
migrated from octopress to pelican, and made his choice on a simple metric:

>Nikola and Pelican both seem to be well-loved by their users, but I had to choose one. I went with Pelican for one simple reason: it has more GitHub forks. I'm sure this is entirely unfair to Nikola and all the contributors who have poured their energy into the project, but I had to choose one way or another.

Well I don't know about unfairness of the method, but from someone who
tested both, I think I prefer pelican... The first reason of course is
that nikola was my first shot at a static, self hosted website (after
an ungly-virtual-host-autogenerated-drupal install), so I'm sure I did
wrong every thing I could. Now I've learned a trick or two, and the
logic behind pelican was easier to grasp.

There are some more reason why I prefer pelican though:

* It's **very** markdown friendly, and though it supports
  reStructuredText, markdown is the prime format. Nikola is the other way round. So if you prefer markdown as I do, go for it.

* The
  [liquid-tags plugin](https://github.com/getpelican/pelican-plugins/tree/master/liquid_tags)
  allows nearly out of the box IPython Notebook to be included in your
  text. Although [Damian Oquanta](http://www.damian.oquanta.info)
  makes terrific themes and ease the publication of notebooks directly
  from the notebook itself in nikola, I couldn't get it to work as easily as
  @jakevdp `liquid_tags` for pelican. Also, I prefer the former logic and work
  flow: Notebooks are stored in a specific directory and you include
  them in your markdown posts (possibly only selected cells), instead
  of being created for the purpose of publishing them, and having to
  deal with metadata at notebook creation time, with a pair of
  `(.ipynb, .ipynb-meta)` pair of files.

On a final note, I think I did a stupid thing with nikola: I was using
nikola _directly on the server_ to serve the html files. I was syncing
the sources of the site via github from my local machine to the
server, and doing the build server side. Don't do this!

With pelican (maybe thanks in part to clearer documentation, in part
to me growing a brain), I set up a dead simple nginx server and **sync
only the rendered html**. Of course that's the only way that makes
sense, but it's not explicitly expressed on the docs of nikola...

Well that's it for now.
